I want to thank you all uh as Allan said
coming out on a Thursday evening to hear
some of the things that I'll tell you
about cancer as he I'm a professor at
Boston College I teach Advanced biology
especially related to cancer and some
and some general biology as well um and
that's what basically uh what my
profession is I'm a professor but we do
a lot of research basic research on
cancer we've developed some of the best
preclin iCal models that we can test and
and vet a variety of different
approaches and then I work with a number
of Physicians who are anxious to adapt
what we're doing because my view on
cancer is I think we need to vet these
things clearly in models that replicate
exactly what goes on in the human
disease so we're sure of two things
number one is what we're planning to do
work and does it not harm the subject
because if we're if we're able to get
the disease managed with without harming
the subject maybe we can now adapt this
for the human and we're starting to see
some successes what I just did was I
took the the data from the American
Cancer Society and we just uh cases per
year new cases deaths and deaths per day
and we go from 90 to that last 26 years
and you know some people say oh we see a
lot of good news in these numbers is
that the number of people dying per day
the increase for those 26 years is not
as is not as uh uh dramatic as the
number of of new cases so the new cases
are flooding into the system uh not only
in the United States this is happening
in all all countries throughout the
world um and in China China is just
devastated by cancer more so than many
other countries so the good news is is
that the the the rate of deaths the body
count is not increasing as rapidly as
the new the new people coming into the
and they say well we're making head
roads and then of course every now and
then on the news you're going to hear
major breakthroughs in cancer um uh that
we're seeing for the first time the
death rate is going down and you'll see
a couple of those of those um uh
situations where it dropped here a
little bit and then you say oh we're
making major but then the next year it
goes back up again and it's this
constant increase so you have to say to
yourselves you know what what is going
on here how is it possible that our
country and so many other countries are
spending so much money on this disease
and yet the progress in managing the
disease is in my mind uh not nearly what
we we think it should be and it seems
like we've been we've become complacent
that cancer is just something we're
going to have to live with and we're
going to have to suffer with because
it's part of of of our technological
societies and I'm saying no that's not
necessarily the case what I have to do
is I have to introduce you to the what
we think cancer is because I think what
we think cancer is currently by the
establishment the pharmaceutical the
academic Industries the federal
government um may not be correct and I'm
going to present evidence and let you uh
look at some of the evidence that we
have accumulated here okay so the
question is provocative question is
cancer a nuclear genetic disease or is
it a mitochondrial metabolic disease
very very different very different uh
aspects of this because this is the cell
and we know that these cells grow out of
control and uh this is a the nucleus of
the cell now according to the current
view the DNA right here in the nucleus
becomes damaged and that's what sends
these tumor cells into uh uncontrolled
growth the other problem the other
aspect here is it a these little
bean-shaped organel that are in the cell
they're called mitochondria and they're
the organel that generate the energy for
our cells they they're responsible for
our respiration so the question is is
cancer a genetic involving the nucleus
as the primary driver of the disease the
mutations in the nucleus or or is it
possible that it's these little organel
in the cytoplasm outside of the nucleus
that might be the real culprits on this
and this is the focus of the first part
of what I'll be talking about just so
you have an idea of what the balance
what we're really talking about here
okay so the current Dogma is cancer is a
genetic disease in this paper by
Hallmark's Next Generation a very uh
commonly cited paper pretty much sets
the whole planing field of what the
nature of this disease is cancer cells
carry the oncogenic and tumor suppressor
mutations that Define cancer as a
genetic disease now we call it a Dogma
uh a Dogma is an irrefutable truth a
Dogma is something that's no longer
questioned a Dogma is something that now
is the way it is we have dealt with all
the other issues this is the way it is
and uh we're going to work within within
this mindset which Li leads to an
ideology now uh I say it's a Dogma
because I told you I teach biology and
biochemistry and genetics at Boston
College and any of the textbooks that
you open up in the section on cancer
first thing cancer is a genetic disease
caused by enogen and tumor suppressor
genes which I'll go over so this is the
where it is and and this information um
is not questioned there's no other
alternative you see you're reading the
books the kids all memorize so we have
indoctrinated several generations of uh
of scientists and Physicians through our
educational process and therefore the
research and the approaches to this
disease come based on the Dogma now
here's an example that they use in the
textbooks uh to illustrate this the car
uh the the Dogma is based platformed on
the somatic mutation theory of cancer
and in my book I go through a very
detailed explanation of all this
basically mutations in genes inhibit or
stimulate cell division and contribute
to cancer so here's a group of cells
they're growing out of control and this
is what we call cancer it's a bunch of
cells in a body that and I'll talk about
how they spread and all this other stuff
met metastasis but they use this car the
car is out of control it's going as fast
as it can it has no breakes and this is
to represent these cells there's no
longer any growth regulation the cells
are growing like crazy because they have
no inhibitor inhibitor genes and the
genes that stimulate growth are are out
of
control so um now the the research
industry and our attempt to understand
and manage this disease is based on
these hallm marks and these are the
Hallmarks that are outlined by by uh
Doug Hanahan and and and Robert Weinberg
at uh who's at MIT um now here
sustaining proliferation evading growth
suppressors activating Invasion and
metastasis enabling replicative
immortality inducing angiogenesis which
is the blood vessels that go into the
tumor cells and resisting cell death now
you have to realize each one of these
Hallmarks is the subject of
multi-billion dollar Industries okay we
have pharmaceutical and academic uh uh
hospitals and Labs focusing on on one or
several of these aspects the so-called
Hallmarks the concept of course is that
if we can understand the mechanisms of
these Hallmarks we can then provide
better therapies for managing the
disease now some emerging Hallmarks that
have come out in the last couple of
years avoiding immune destruction tumor
promoting inflammation genomic
instability and disregulated cell
energetics which I'm showing you right
here and I'll be focusing on this
so-called emerging Hallmark um because I
don't think it's the emerging Hallmark I
think it is the origin and I'll show you
evidence for that now to preserve the
Dogma if you read these these books and
these papers these scientific papers
very carefully they recognize this as an
emerging Hallmark but they say
disregulated cell energetics is now an
emerging Hallmark that is programmed by
proliferating inducing ancoin this
concept preserves the Dogma so the Dogma
everything has to do with the nuclear
gene mutations and that's the origin of
the disease so whatever you want to look
at any one of these Hallmarks or any of
these differences it's got to be based
on the fundamental issue of the Dogma
which is the somatic mutation Theory of
cancer okay the singular most important
aspect of the disease is metastasis
because ultimately metastasis is what is
most difficult to control and ultimately
leads the disease itself or our attempts
to manage the disease leads to the death
of majority of people with cancer so the
interesting thing and this is a a a
diagram or a picture the green cells are
the tumor cells and they go through this
stereotypical Cascade metastatic Cascade
the interesting thing about the
metastatic Cascade is that it's a very
stereotype whether you have lung cancer
uh colon cancer bladder cancer breast
cancer these cancer cells go through a
very stereotypic process uh local
Invasion so the cells break through
their normal barrier in intravasation
which means they enter into the
bloodstream this is a very sophisticated
biological process you can't believe the
the the number of reactions that require
cells to that are not supposed to be in
the bloodstream to get into the
bloodstream they have immune system
survival the IM immune system doesn't
attack attack them they're
immunosuppressive and some of these new
drugs you hear about these checkpoint
Inhibitors and all this they're they're
designed to try to make them more imuno
responsive uh in extravasation so these
tumor cells here in the bloodstream they
they leave the bloodstream and they
enter into different organs or different
systems at at distant places this is
called extravasation and secondary tumor
formation and it happens when you start
your body starts to collect tumor cells
you can no longer use surgery you can no
longer use radi you have to then fall
back on these new so-call
immunotherapies and these new tox old
toxic drugs and whatever you want to do
you're trying to you're trying to
cleanse your body of these metastatic
cancer cells and then you hear all the
time well they reverted we weren't
successful they're coming back the sanes
are very tough they're doing this and
they're doing that and everybody seems
to be okay with that so let me present
evidence the challenges the sematic
mutation theory of cancer and again I
when I present this some people don't
want to see it they don't want to talk
about it and they don't want to hear it
so uh but anyway I'll proceed with it
anyway um now one of the most
interesting studies that was done by
done by um mckinnel and his group and I
had a chance to speak to him he's a
professor emeritus at the University of
Minnesota and he did this study and
published a top Journal science
1969 and what he did is there's a form
of tumor in the in the Frog it's the
luck tumor it's a renal very deadly
rapidly growing malignant tumor in the
kidney of the Frog so he took the cells
out of the Frog kidney here here's the
cell from the tumor cell the tumor cell
and he removed the nucleus of the tumor
cell that supposedly has the mutations
that caused the disease and then he put
that nucleus into a fertilized egg and
removed the the natural nucleus and put
the tumor nucleus into this new
cytoplasm that contain normal
mitochondria and then you have this now
new egg and this egg developed into this
tadpole that's shown right here and he
evaluated the tadpole there was no
abnormal abnormal cell growth there was
no dysmorphic there was no tumors there
was nothing that you would call cancer
yet it came from this rapidly growing
malignant tumor the interesting thing
about this study is that this tadpole
for whatever reason there was something
in the nucleus of the tumor cell that
prevented the tadpole from maturing into
an adult frog so there was some definit
there was some problem but the findings
are inconsistent with the sematic
mutation Theory which says that the
genes in the nucleus are responsible for
the abnormal cell growth there was
another study done by beerus minz at at
um uh in in Philadelphia at Thomas
Jefferson beer and Carl meny and they
they have a a malignant teratoma which
is very rapidly growing kind of an
embryoid kind of tumor and they took
this the whole cell out of that and they
put it into a blastocyst of a mouse and
they cloned a mouse that contained part
tumor cells part cells from the teratoma
and part normal cells and yet and yet
the mouse had no cancer and they were
able to show that these tumor cells were
not forming cancer in this in this mouse
so their conclusion was conversion to
neoplasia which is this abnormal cell
growth does not involve structural
changes in the nuclear genome what does
that mean it it this is not consistent
with what we're told in the somatic
mutation Theory wasn't
discussed Rudy Anish at MIT and his
group did another study Rudy is a very
interesting guy he's the leader in in
Maman developmental biology he is he is
the Premier Maman developmental
biologist he saw those other studies and
he said I don't believe those other
studies until I can do it myself with my
system at MIT so he took melanoma cells
and he from a Mel a mouse melanoma and
he characterized the kinds of mutations
that were in the nucleus of the melanoma
then he took the nucleus out of the
melanoma cells and again put it into an
embryonic stem cell and cloned these
mice this is one of them here from the
nucleus of the melanoma and he found the
same mutations that were in this mouse
embryo that were present in the original
melanoma but this Mouse had no cancer it
wasn't it wasn't producing the phenotype
that we would call neoplasia so he says
here the presence of the major genetic
abnormalities in the embryon cloned from
the tumor provides unequivocal genomic
evidence that these mice were cloned
from the tumor nucleus yet they did not
present the phenotype that would be
expected based on the dogma and the
sematic mutation Theory
inconsistent this was a more recent
study done by Benny at at at Vera
College of Medicine Benny KATU and his
group and when he said what he did he
took very aggressive uh breast human
breast cancer U metastatic breast cancer
cells and what he did is he's he has
this even harder technology he removed
the cytoplasm containing the abnormal
mitochondria and put normal mitochondria
with the still the metastatic nucleus
and before he did that he characterized
all these abnormal enogen the ones that
are supposedly driving the disease and
in the melanoma they had very high
enogen and when he took and put normal
mitochondria into this into this breast
cancer cell the cell stopped growing and
the enogen turned off which was very
like what's going on here in other words
the enogen are being controlled by the
mitochondria in the cytoplasm which is
like completely different from the
sematic mutation Theory so what I did
last summer I finally after years I put
it in my book and then I extended it
recently um I I brought together all of
these observ I only gave you a snapshot
because I don't have time to go through
all these experiments the the uh but
they're all in they're all in this paper
and they're in my book so what I did as
I said okay we have we have we have two
fundamental explanations for the origin
of cancer we have two fundamental
explanations one is the sematic mutation
Theory and the other is it's not in the
nucleus it's in the cytoplasm and the
mitochondria let's compare and contrast
the observations from all these
different kinds of studies and see what
the results and so I tell people if
you're interested in knowing the
argument read the paper make your own
decision don't just listen to me look at
the original papers read them for
yourselves I know there sometimes they
can be somewhat technical but that will
you know you're weighing comparing your
contrast and then as a the rational mind
will look at the information and say hey
I I I think it's this way or that way so
this summarizes what I just said in a
very simple cartoon um normal cells
beget normal cells tumor cells beget
tumor cells we know this okay what is
responsible for the dysplastic cell
growth and the abnormal growth of these
tumor cells is it the nuclear mutations
is it the mutations in the nucleus like
the Dogma says or is it the defects in
the cytoplasm the mitochondria okay it
was tested so You' move this nucleus
into a new cytoplasm with normal
mitochondria and you got normal cells
sometimes normal tissue and sometimes a
normal Mouse and if you move the normal
nucleus into the tumor cytoplasm you got
either dead cells or tumor cells you
never got normal cells this is just the
opposite of what you would expect if
cancer were a nuclear genetic disease so
this is very hard information for the
for the for indoctrinated people to
swallow this is very hard information to
swallow all right again I don't want to
hear it I don't want to talk about it
okay so if sematic mutations are not the
origin of cancer then where did these
cells come from how do we get cancer if
mutations in the nucleus are not the
cause of the
disease so warberg had this disease
pegged a long time ago a famous German
scientist from the 1920s um did his work
in the 20s and 30s 40s and 50s uh
basically warberg said cancer arises
from damage to the cellular respiration
in cells energy through fermentation
which is a primitive form of energy uh
gradually compensates for insufficient
respiration cancer cells continue to
ferment lactic acid or lactate in the
presence of oxygen this is called the
warberg effect you see we shouldn't be
fermenting if oxygen is present it's
called the pastur effect these are very
complicated phenomena if you put yeast
cells in no oxygen they throw out lactic
acid they begin to ferment okay but if
you bring oxygen in they stop fermenting
and they start to breathe respiration is
breathing cancer cells continue to
ferment even when oxygen is present so
this is this is an aberration this is an
abnormal thing all cancer cells to one
degree or another are fermenters all
right so then the enhanced fermentation
is the signature metabolic malady of all
cancer cells so when we look at cancer
from the genomic at Atlas the cancer
genome Atlas we take someone's tumor and
we spend a lot of money fragmenting
thousands and thousands of mutations and
cataloging all of these mutations and
what we find is that every cell in the
tumor has a different constellation of
mutations so the goal of the
personalized medicine is essentially to
try to Target different kinds of
Pathways from these mut mutate mutated
cells to try to manage the disease but
every cell has so many different kinds
of mutations how are you going to build
a cocktail of of targets when every cell
is different and they all have
constellation this is the strategy this
is called personalized medicine which is
being done today now that's one okay
that's what I just
said is it just think for a minute do
you think that's the wise strategy now
if every cell in that tumor is
fermenting to some degree regardless of
what the nuclear mutations are and we
know what the fuels are that these cells
are using to ferment doesn't it make
sense that you might want
to uh deprive those cells of those fuels
they're using to ferment when all of
them are doing the same thing to one
form or
another why are we not doing
that so when we talk about
respiration it's what is respiration we
breathe air we're sitting here right now
tonight we're breathing right nobody's F
fermenting even if you're falling asleep
you're not going to be fermenting you're
still going to be breathing so we
breathe in air and we exhale all right
what we breathe in oxygen and the waste
products of fermentation are basically
carbon dioxide from the foods that we
ate and water that's the waste product
all right and we get most of our energy
by breathing we breathe and we get very
little energy by primitive fermentation
processes this um uh glycolysis in the
cytoplasm and we get a little
fermentation energy from the kreb cycle
the TCA Tri tricarboxylic acid cycle so
you can see 5% 5% most of our energy
comes from breathing we breathe in Air
oxygen oxygen is what's keeping us going
the cancer cell is very different the
cancer cell gets a lot of its energy
from these more primitive forms these
primitive fermentation processes existed
on the planet before oxygen came two
billion years ago we had a lot of
organisms back then but they fermented
there was no oxygen how are they going
to grow and they grew like crazy they
proliferated and then they died when
there was a food source they could grow
like crazy when the food was stopped
they died okay so cancer cell is simply
a shift away from breathing away from
respiration to processes involving
fermentation
so I went through and I showed you that
this is the mitochondria inside of
electron microscope because these
organel are very very tiny you need em
electron microscopy to see them here's
the organel broken down into its various
components these little Stripes that you
see here these Stripes They're called
christe they are the those little
membranes christe contain the proteins
and the lipids that allow us to breathe
to get energy from oxygen all right we
breathe in and those that's electron
transport chain in action right and
those little Stripes this is the
mitochondria from AO blastoma multiform
a very deadly human brain tumor you've
heard probably a lot about with uh
Senator Biden's son and uh others that
have had these horrible tumors and
there's a chryssis you see those little
stripes are missing we call this a ghost
mitochondria the very structures that
are responsible for us getting energy
from respiration are missing this or
organel is not going to be able to
produce sufficient energy by by
respiration so if that cell that tumor
cell is going to live it has to get an
energy from a different source and that
source is this primitive form of energy
called
fermentation now we I want to go back
and say that we don't know of any cancer
cell that has completely normal numbers
and function and structure of
mitochondria when you look at tissues in
culture you might see a little bit
different but when you look at solid
tissues you usually see that
okay so what we have to do if we're
going to redefine what the nature of
cancer is we just can't ignore all of
the other information that's happened
through Decades of research by the top
medical schools and the top Labs
throughout the world we don't ignore
that stuff we just have to re-explain it
we just have to provide an alternative
explanation for what we what we what we
have a new way of looking at the same
information the information is not going
to change we have new in the nucleus yes
there are mutations in the nucleus yes
these cells ferment they don't respire
yes they have all of these things so how
do we reconfigure the origin of the
disease in light of a reconfig
reanalysis of the information about the
disease so we have to go back to the
hallm marks of cancer like I showed you
that the Dogma is telling us and we have
to be able to re-explain the Dogma in
light of an alternative explanation for
what the disease is and that and that
explanation is mitochondrial metabolic
disease but we have to first deal with
the Paradox the oncogenic Paradox has
stumbled many scientists in this field
okay so let me just say for a minute
what is this oncogenic par was first
pointed out by Albert
sorgi uh who was uh won the Nobel Prize
for his work on vitamin C he said
there's a problem here there's a problem
and it's the Paradox how is it possible
that so many provocative agents that we
know are linked to the origin of of
cancer could produce cancer through a
common pathophysiological mechanism okay
and if you want to see if any of you
have read uh um sarus muk's book The
Emperor of all maladies it was on the
New York Times best sist he won the
pulit surprise um Ken Burns uh the
famous movie guy he just produced a film
on the Emperor of all maladies I mean he
got a lot of press a lot of people heard
about this look at page 285 in mukerji's
book He's struggling with the oncogenic
Paradox on 303 he struggles with the
oncogenic Paradox look it up so he said
how is it possible we know carcinogens
carcinogens in the environment cause
cancer radiation causes cancer hypoxia
inflammation rare mutations Ras oncogene
viruses uh age the older you get the
more likely you get cancer viruses
hepatitis C virus papiloma virus HIV
virus they all cause cancer they all
damage the respiration they all cause
problems they all generate reactive
oxygen species in the organel called the
mitochondria that's supposed to give us
energy okay and then people say what
about the rare what about these people
who get like Angelina Jolene gets braco
one she has her her breast removed her
ovary and whatever and other people do
these prophylatic responses because they
inherit a gene therefore cancer must be
a genetic disease because the gene
causes it Leaf real many syndrome
ovarian and brain cancer and a variety
of other cancers caused by inherited
mutation in p-53 the tumor suppressor
those mutations knock out and influence
the function of this organel so they're
really secondary causes as is carcinogen
radiation and hypoxia all of them work
through the mitochondria and the Ross
reactive oxygen species these Ross are
carcinogenic and mutagenic that means
they cause mutations and they produce
cancer so the Ross come from damage
these things in the environment or
inherited damage the organel this
produces reactive oxygen species these
reactive oxygen species further damage
the organel and they also cause
mutations so now we go back to the the
Dogma the Dogma says cancer is a disease
of somatic mutations where are all these
somatic mutations coming from they're
coming from the Ross generated by the
mitochondria so are they the cause of
the cancer or are they the effect of the
cancer which I should say not the cancer
itself but the initiating cause of the
disease because then the disease
progresses now these little organel
signal the nucleus and says we're not
we're not able to get enough uh we can't
breathe basically we're we're
suffocating so the cell has two choices
the cell can either die it can say well
you suffocate you're going to die you
hold your breath long enough you're all
going to die right okay or you can turn
on genes that are going to upregulate
primitive Pathways that existed long
time ago millions of years that were
evolved and you ferment and all cancer
cells then begin to turn on these enogen
and the bogens are transcription factors
to ulate these primitive energy Pathways
that existed on the planet before oxygen
came in so we're these cells are are
going back to a state that organisms on
the planet existed in a billion years
ago so now they become free of
Regulation so that what was normally
regulating the mitochondria is now
becoming dysfunctional now we can begin
to link the Hallmarks of the disease to
this linkage scenario as the cells stop
responding ing stop breathing they start
fermenting the red line is IND
indicative of fermentation so your cells
that the mitochondria become
progressively damaged because this is an
evolving escalating situation now the
cells enter the default State all of
these first three Hall marks these cells
flip to the way they were before oxygen
which is disregulated cell growth they
proliferate as long as food is there for
fermentation these cells will grow like
crazy then they because cancer looks
like a wound that doesn't heal blood
vessels come in in so this is the
angiogenic thing that we spend millions
of dollars billions of dollars trying to
figure out this process here driven by
VF and then we get why the cells
normally when a cell gets sick it dies
is a program cell death apotosis the
cell begins to die from a program
process the very organel that that is
the the the kill switch so to speak this
the very organel that's the kill switch
to get rid of a dead cell or a sick cell
is broken the switch doesn't work these
cells are now disregulated and they can
continue to proliferate as the result of
this fall back and they're lacking it
now where does metastasis come from
because that's really the thing you can
talk about a lot of what I've already
spoken about happens in benign tumors as
well and yet we spend you can't believe
how many we spend more money studying
benign tumors than we do studying
metastatic disease how do we get
metastasis okay here's the scenario
here's a normal population of cells they
get provoked by one of the by by by
something in the environment or or
chemical radiation virus infection age
whatever they start to proliferate but
they don't spread they form a lump or a
bump and they continue to grow maybe
very microscopically the cells of our
immune system the macras that signal
that there's something Disturbed in the
micro environment come in and they come
in as wound healing cells and the wound
doesn't heal because they throw growth
factors out to help heal these wounds
they don't know that these are abnormal
cells so they throw growth factors out
this is all these cells are scripted
they're evolutionary metabolically
scripted they don't think they don't
have minds they do what the environment
tells them to do based on the on the
situation now what happens these cells
are so effective at healing wounds that
if the cell if the the cells they're
trying to heal the wounds don't heal
they actually have are very fusogenic in
some ways they actually fuse with each
other and with other cells say okay I'm
going to actually take care of this by
Fusion now what happens is organel
transfer I said these have damaged
respiration mitochondria gradually as
this
festation continues the the mitochondri
inside these red cells these Macs become
displaced by the mitochondria from the
abnormal cancer cell these
non-metastatic cells and now you have
these cells here these are hybrid Fusion
cells these macrofagos are are they go
through our body they are the Sentinels
of our body they enter and exit tissues
they're programmed to do this if you cut
yourself and bacteria get into the skin
the macrofagos come in Kill the bacteria
heal the wound now we have disregulated
out of control macrofagos that now they
are they enter into intravasation extrav
this what they do they're genetic you
don't have to Envision new mutations to
do this and there's number of cancers
they can't find any mutations in these
things all right now the interesting
thing here is these guys are glucose and
glutamine driven okay their behavior is
glucose and glutamine driven that's what
they do so if most cancers Express the
warberg effect as a result of impaired
respiration what therapies might be
effective in managing and preventing
tumors now you see once we once once
once we have a clear idea of what the
nature of this disease is okay once we
now oh my God it's not a genetic disease
despite the fact that we're spending
billions of dollars in this in this in
this failed effort and the the body
count tells you that um okay now what
can we do all right so these cells are
now dependent heavily on glucose and
glutamine so what we want to do now is
we want to try to see what we can do one
strategy is to try to reduce levels of
ferment able fuels while elevating
levels of non-fermentable fuels one of
the ways we did this initially was
calorie restriction it's a metabolic
cancer intervent involves a total
dietary restriction differs from
starvation maintains minerals and
nutrients and enhances mitochondrial
biogenesis which is really important
because you can build new mitochondria
by by simply stopping eating um but you
got to realize this is not easy no one I
always said people love to talk about
calorie restriction on a full stomach
believe
me believe me I go around you know even
I talked to the last last week I was out
talking to the calor restriction Society
of America you know those guys there you
know they they don't eat anything right
they they share a grape when they have a
meeting you know so um but any event
they they're but it's very hard to do
that okay so calorie restriction in mice
mimics water only therapeutic fasting in
you what does that mean I just drink
water you mean I can't have a snack no
snacks just water
all right what about what about a no
just water oh jeez that's pretty tough
how long do I going to do that can I can
I do that for an hour or two no no no
you got to do it for like a week I don't
that's all that I'm walking the other
way so um but anyway you're going to see
some we've we've documented differences
between Mouse and man because the mouse
his heart rate is 600 beats a minute you
know if our heart rate was 600 my head
would blow off my body so um so you have
to realize what we see in the mouse oh
yeah look at that Mouse only he has to
need is 40% less and look he gets his
tumor is gone H doesn't work that way in
us all right so anyway when you stop
eating uh blood sugar goes down all
right so your brain needs all the sugar
if your blood if your blood goes down
too far you you fall unconscious you got
to call the EMT gives you uh gives you
chicklet or something makes your sugar
go back up hey what happened so so what
happens is but you see it goes down
gradually it doesn't go down too fast
you stop eating blood sugar goes down
because insulin goes down insulin goes
down because blood sugar goes down your
body says Hey when is this guy then I I
get hungry I got to go back and eat some
stuff I get my my sugar back up again I
feel good all right so but if you don't
go back and get something to eat the
body says okay this guy's not going to
get something to eat if we don't get
something to eat soon we're going to go
unconscious so the brain has to all has
an alternative it burns ketones where do
you get ketones from fat okay we we EV
evolved we're evolving our species you
us we we survived we're supremely
designed to not eat now you put an
organism
the human being in an in an environment
this organism we us were designed to
survive for long periods of time without
food because we have an incredible
capacity to store energy what happens
when you take this kind of an organism
and put it in an environment where all
this food is glucose as much as you can
eat wherever you want to go everywhere
on the the store Donuts pizzas you get
fat right this is this is what happens
now what happens now you can mobilize
that fat if you stop eating the fat go
that you take it out of your fat goes to
the liver the liver now brings these
Ketone bodies and the Brain begins to
burn Ketone bodies this is how we
function when we don't eat so these
water soluble Ketone bodies are an
alternative to glucose and they can then
replace glucose the problem is the tumor
cells can't use these very well they
need a good mitochondria to burn ketones
and the tumor cells don't have that and
here's just a Qui quick diagram so a
brain tumor cell we work with a lot of G
blastoma a lot of brain tumor glucose
comes in under normal conditions the
glucose would be fully oxidized and
you'd produce CO2 and water but the
tumor cells don't can't use the the U
they can't fully oxidize or breathe so
they produce a lot of waste lactic acid
is a waste product of of glucose
fermentation creates acidity in the
micro environment acidity it causes
inflammation and all this kind of stuff
and the tumor gets worse so we lower
glucose and we bring in ketones they
bypass the problem is the tumor cells
can't use these Ketone bodies
effectively so we're essentially
starving we're metabolically
marginalizing the tumor cells we're
taking away their Prime fuel which is
glucose and we're offering them up an
offering of an alternative fuel that all
the normal cells in our body can burn
effectively because we evolve to do that
but the tumor cell can't because it has
these defective
respiration so here's an example of a
mouse uh this is adaba means this mouse
was allowed to eat all the food that it
wanted it's a high carbon hydrate
standard Mouse Chow diet and we just
restricted the amount of calories by 40%
3 days after tumor cells were implanted
into the brain and we can get anywhere
from a 65 to an 85% reduction in the
size of the tumor simply by restricting
the amount of calories that this mouse
ate now we also show each one of these
little squares is a mouse under a
different diet and you can see uh as
glucose goes down going from higher to
lower ketones go up this is the ution
arily conserved adaptation happens in
the mouse happens in the rat happens in
humans as glucose goes down the tumor
weight goes down since we published this
it's been replicated in humans for brain
cancer and breast cancer and colon
cancer you eat less sugar the tumors
don't grow as fast now what is the
mechanism by which it works it targets
three of the Prime Hallmarks of cancer
it's anti-angiogenic it stops the blood
vessels going into the tumor it's
anti-inflammatory and it's proapototic
it kills the tumor cells by a non
provocative mechanism it's called
program cell death each one of these
processes is the subject of
multi-billion dollar Industries building
drugs that can be anti-angiogenic
anti-inflamm bismid avastin is one of
these you know it doesn't work I'm going
to explain that anti-inflammatory drugs
drugs drugs drugs if you stop eating you
get the same effect right nobody tells
you that